Harvey (Geographical Knowledge/Political Power): The temptation then exists to abandon theory, retreat into the supposed particularities of place and moment, resort to naive empiricism and produce as many ad hoc theories as there are instances. All prospectives for communication then break down save those preserved by the conventions of common language.... Retreat from explicit theory is retreat from the challenge to make concious and creative interventions in the construction of future geographies. The junction between geography and social theory, therefore, is one of the crucial flash-points for the crystalization of new conceptions of the world and new possibilities for active intervention.

Harvey (51): On this basis Marx evolves certain fundamental assumptions regarding the way in which the world is structured and organized. Ollman suggests that: 'The twin pillars of Marx's ontology are his conception of reality as expandable relations such that each in its fullness can represent the totality'.

Marx's relational conception of reality is fundamentally different from the Aristelian view (characterisitc of logical empiricism or Ricardian type model building) in which things are regarded as definable without reference to the relationships they have to other things. [Jeremy Rifkin offers a similar argument in the Empathic civilization (608) in which he notes the scientific method casts as objective observers and that "We are left with a purely material world, which is quantifiable but witout quality."... goes back to Francis Bacon, then Goethe in opposition arguing that "nature is best approached as a participant rather than as a disinterested bystander. Goethe called his approach 'a delicate empiricism which in a most inward way makes itself identical with the object and thereby becomes the actual theory'"]

"if my model does not conform to reality then it is reality that is wrong" Losch 1954, p. 363.

Harvey (9): referencing Marx, we can rub different conceptual blocks together to make an intellectual fire... Is there something that can come out of this which is a new form of knowledge?

Confucious believed "To enlarge oneself, one should try to enlarge others." Leaving one's ego behind and entering into deep compassionate relationship with others.


Rifkin: Luria in studies in Uzbekistan and Kirghizia from 1931 to 1932 studied oral socities. Luria wanted to study oral people's ability to self-analyze. Found collect 'we' dominates and differentiation into recognizable self is constrained. Reported on illiterate middle-aged man. "Luria asked him, 'What sort of person are you, what's your character like, what are your good qualities and short-comings? How would you describe yourself' Man responded based on where he was from and concrete terms not in abstract. When shown geometric shapes, saw them as objects like circle as plate/moon/watch.

Empathic civilization and social bonds - large social networks, recommender system research, and how to understand weak social ties in modern society. Script, print, and electronic communcations have allowed us to vastly extend our social networks and live in densely populated and complex environments.


Hobbes viwed human nature as aggressive and self-interested. We are born to fite and compete, relentless struggle with one another to dominate. Locke took a gentler approach arguing that in a pure state of nature human beings are sociable and kindly disposed to one another. Nonetheless, we are according to Lock aquisitive by nature and use mental and physical labour to expropriate material world and reshp into productive property. Jeremy Bentham and utilitarians aggred with lock that are by nature materialists and as such seek to optimize pleasure and mitigate pain.

Term empathy didn't become part of human vocabulary until aboput 1909! About same time as modern psychology. Think about Smith et al. in context of lack of empathy science as terms. We were not encultured to think therapeutically until 1880s! Sympathy didn't come into vogue in English until European Enlightenment acording to Rifkin.